I was disappointed that he had been invited.
Thank you very much for coming before us today.
We really appreciate it. We're looking forward
to having a conversation, uh, with you.
Um, but as, uh, a start, we, we will allow you maybe, uh,
three or four minutes to give us a little bit of a,
an intro, uh, before we get into q and a.
So
Thank you very much for the opportunity to come
and, uh, present in front of you.
Just if I, uh, take an opportunity to cover off a couple
of highlights that we are proud of as an organization, um,
of our achievements over the past year, uh, particularly
around a lot of our engagement
and partnerships with other organizations to help
support our aspirations for, uh,
to achieve the audacious goal of, you know,
achieving a million speakers.
Um, we realized that that can't just be done by us alone,
needs to be in partnership with others.
And of course, you may remember, uh, last year with the, um,
quick selling out of the warehouse merchandise.
Um, and it's those kind of partnerships that helps
to promote the brand, the brand of, of Toto, um,
amongst other things,
but also with companies such as Skyport, um,
and doing the Olympics, creating language for the Olympics
so that there's an engagement in current, uh, at the time.
Um, and I see is not here at the moment,
but just acknowledge her
and her support of, of
that working alongside the Olympic team.
Um, and then of course, we continue
to have an increased number of, um,
people sitting their licenses for, uh, interpreters
and translators, uh, which we see as quite positive
that people are getting more
and more confident, uh, with Terre to be able
to sit the license, um, and achieve that.
And, uh, lastly, just a couple of our, um,
variant reports around our engagement
and supporting organizations with the work of helping
to coordinate the Mahi Corona.
Um, and, you know, 97% of them who believe
that we did have a positive impact on working alongside them
to help support them with their language, uh, aspirations.
Um, and of course we continue to try
and build relationships with lots
and lots of people to, um, ultimately, uh,
deliver on the, um, as the vision in the Wahi Corona,
which is, which means to spread the language
as far and wide as possible.
So, on that note, I just want to thank you all
for, for this opportunity,
Gilda. And just before
I take the first question from my fellow
members, uh, let's just acknowledge the, uh,
the audit report and that very, very good.
So well onto to the organization with that itself. Okay.
So with that, I'll, I'll call
for the first question for members of that one.
Sure. Yeah.
I have, thank you for being here.
And I happen to be the one of the er early beneficiaries
of the, the t-shirts of Oh, good.
Good on, I smoking a cup of tea downstairs
and we on the t-shirts.
Um, you were very candid in your
opening statement in the report.
Um, you said, uh, Terre Maori flourish continues
to flourish in the hearts, homes
and hopes of New Zealanders.
There's also been the subject of resistance debate
and political posturing.
And then you go under say, these tensions only reinforce
what many already know.
Language revitalization is not linear.
It must be protected
and propelled every day, every word, every speaker,
every action counts.
I wonder if you can, um, expand on what you
mean by the political posturing
and how that undermines the objectives of
revitalizing and expanding the use of Al Maori.
I think it would be, um, uh, obvious in some
of the statements around removing bilingual signage, um,
and, uh, not necessarily, um, uh,
open support for teil.
Hmm. But I, I just wanna take a step back from that
and what's happening today and kind of frame this in.
For the last 52 years, Maori has always been, uh,
a part of our resistance
and a part of, uh, a struggle that we've had.
Um, and language revitalization is a three
generational, uh, effort.
It's not a, uh,
it takes one generation to lose the language.
It takes three generations to restore it.
And consequently, within those three generations within our
whanau, people are at different parts of the journey.
And I think whilst, you know, removing bilingual signage,
uh, is not helpful from a language planning perspective.
I can talk about that for hours,
but I don't have that much time.
Um, it hasn't stopped the enthusiasm of people
to continue to support il.
And I think that's the thing that I'm really heartened by.
And it is part of the resilience of IL always kind
of being in the space of having to
find opportunities to flourish.
And I think what I'm parted by as the commissioner is
that people still continue to turn up for tu mm-hmm.
People are still celebrating it, uh, despite
whatever people might say about Il Maori.
So that's kind of where that is
Follow up.
Absolutely. Are you concerned, um, that there's still,
for some in living memory when it was forbidden to speak
to Al Maori in schools, it's not the 1860s,
we're talking about the 1950s,
and are you concerned about the, um, um,
removal of a requirement for school boards to uphold
as a regression to the idea that, uh, not only
but, but also al Maori
and te Maori, uh, not part of a broader
societal cultural obligation that the Crown has
and in turn the education structures of the Crown?
Um, I think, um, so yes.
Um, but I think within the remit of, um,
what our focus is on how we continue to advance il mm-hmm.
And how do we continue to promote IL uh, in all spaces,
you know, supporting, um, you know, uh,
whanau to see that IL and society is still valued.
And that is hard. It is hard.
Um, but I think that's where we are heartened
by creating partnerships, not just with government agencies,
but actually with private sector as you find private sector,
um, do see the value of as part of their brand.
Um, and so working, you know, sometimes you have to work
with the willing, uh,
and those who are already on board with the copa.
And so I, you know, within the resourcing
that we have is trying to work alongside those
who are prepared to do that.
Got it. Very diplomatic.
I, yeah, just, yeah, I mean, my, my, my experience,
I've been absolutely delighted to see it in terms,
I've got 17, no 20 schools now.
Actually, my lectures just grown in,
and every one of those schools is, um,
is offering terre Maori
and placing a really emphasis on, on, on growing that.
And, and so, um, it's, it's fantastic to see.
Um, within that, could you speak to, um,
your role alongside TPK in the, on the development
of the next, um, mahi?
Um, well, one of the things that we, we believe is
that the mahi doesn't need a lot of changing.
What it does need is consultation with the various partners
to get agreement on where, on how we should change it.
And that was something that was pointed out, uh,
in the inaugural validation of the, of the Mahi Corona
that the agencies didn't feel that they were listened to,
uh, and that things were done
to them then rather than done with them.
So for us, it's really, really important, I think,
to call the agencies together or their representatives
and to say to them, okay, this is where we want to go.
What do you think? Um,
you know, and, and get that agreement?
Because for me, you know, if you don't get the agreement,
then you don't get the commitment.
Mm-hmm. And the other thing is right, I,
I can't underline kindness enough in terms of the language,
um, because nobody wants to go
through this life changing decision to learn a language
and then to be told that's wrong all the time.
Right. What they wanted, what they want is to be, uh,
corrected in a way that keeps their mind up.
It doesn't feel, make them feel like they're done. Right.
Yeah. Um, so we, you know, the days of us taking people
to task in the press of mispronouncing names
and stuff along Kong, more likely
to ring them up and offer them some help.
But that's got to be a key part of the approach
around the implementation of the Mahi Corona so
that people will continue to engage or feel included
and feel safe to learn and make mistakes.
Because the most obvious, uh, you know, consequence
of learning something new is making a mistake.
You know? And, and there's an old
saying that's how you get it right.
By making mistakes. So, you know, that
for us is a big thing, but we reckon we could get it done
and three to six months at the most.
And I have the absolute, I
have absolute confidence in my team.
We're a little organization, but we get things done,
and that's what we pride ourselves on.
Just to add to that, and more specifically
to your question, I think we have, um, uh, continued
to ask the minister to be able to work alongside TPK, uh,
to help co-design what that might look like.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so there has been a bit of to
and throwing, if I'm being honest, right.
Um, but we look forward to the opportunity to be able to,
uh, throw ourselves into that
because we do feel like we are able to, you know, provide
and contribute to the Mahi Corona refresh, um,
based on the work that we've done over the past few years.
So at this stage, you don't feel like you are, um,
included in that, in that process to the point you'd
Like to be? Well, we've had meetings
with them Yeah.
And we've gotten, um, to the point
of, of putting down a plan.
Yeah. Um, and that's also around the development of policy
as well, which my board has asked for.
Um, and I think given the, the, the job cuts
that have happened at, we are probably ideally placed
to provide them with that support.
Right. We also have a, a crack research team, which is,
I mean, look, if you look at most of the research
that's been done into Ted Maori over the past, um, seven
or eight years, it's been commissioned by us.
So look, it's really,
those are the things we bring to the table.
We've made that offer to, to, um, the, um,
initial is that they'll work with us, uh,
on the Mahi Corona refresh.
We, we just, um, hurry to get it done
because it's now been almost two years, uh,
since the Ma Corona expired.
I have, have a question. If I have a
question, I be you to it.
Um, um, thank you for being with us.
I, um, I wouldn't normally go so deep into this,
but I was looking, I opened the questions, the answers
to the questions that you sent, uh, through,
and I was really interested in, um, the gender pay gap, um,
answers, which has completely gone down a totally different
rabbit hole right now, um,
but reduced from 27% in 2022 to 19% in 2024,
which is a big change.
And I understand hadn't quite been measured when,
uh, you've done this one.
Um, that is a big change.
But, uh, you know, the national average is, well,
the national number I think is 8% now.
Uh, so do you have some plans, some further plans to, uh,
work towards reducing that gap further?
Uh, yeah, we do. Um, what we tend to have, um, I,
I can remember when my current HR advisor started,
she said to me, we've got a problem.
And I said, why? She said, we have a gender imbalance, 75%
of our staff, female.
Yes. Um, and, uh, and a lot.
And I said, well, when 75% of male will come back to me.
Right. Um, and,
and the issue that we've trying to be, we've been working
with is bringing, uh, um, our, our further up the pay scale.
Yes. Um, a lot of them are working in the admin and advisor
and sort of advisor, senior advisor area,
but now, um, two of the three dce are female.
Mm-hmm. Um, and, um, yeah.
And we, you know, we're working at, um,
actively working on closing that pay gap,
And it's not easy.
I understand, you know, a small organization relatively,
you know, medium size, it's not easy,
but I just making sure that they're still working on
Yeah. When, when we look at
it in terms of bans, there's not
that there's nowhere near a 19%, um, gap,
but when you look at it overall,
you aggregate it all. There is. Yes.
Okay. Thank you. Just to add to that,
and that's probably, I mean,
there's probably no correlation,
but I think the majority of, of, um, people
who are in language revitalization
who are very passionate about language that are woman Mm.
And so ideally, you know, our workforce will become,
you know, largely woman as Natalie's already pointed out.
Mm. So I'm hopeful.
Keep going, keep going.
Um, colleagues, I have a few questions,
but happy to start with the one then you just,
you just stop me when you want.
Um, thanks again for being here.
Uh, with respect to the, um, the T-shirts, um,
in the first 15 minutes at the Warehouse, um,
the first store sold out, um, with the funds that come from
that, I'm sorry, I tried to see,
but I couldn't find, does that, um, is that part of maybe,
um, sustainability planning in terms
of finances going forward?
Oh, there are two things. Um,
the first thing was we couldn't, um,
get the gear out to people.
We are not a, a clothing manufacturer or a retailer.
Uh, and look, you know, I used to give away hoodies
and t-shirts to people, and they had got their Christmas
at all come at once, you know?
Mm-hmm. Um, and so I was thinking last year, um,
that we needed to find a way to get them out there, um,
that didn't take away from the resource, uh, you know, uh,
available to our staff.
So, and, and the staff at resource as well.
And, and that's when the email from, uh, uh, one
of the staff at the warehouse arrived.
So the idea behind it was to take
that financial burden off us
because we couldn't get them
for anything less than $60 per hoodie, a lot of money.
And for me, that was just unsustainable.
The second, second thing was there was a demand.
People love them. They, they wanted their little ticky on
their, on the front of their hoodie.
So when the Warehouse opportunity popped up, um, we went
with it because we weren't commissioning
anybody or giving away any money.
Um, and now, I think the first, in the first year
that we ran that, this particular year anyway, um,
I think all up was about 80,000 in royalties from
I think the sale of about 70,000
or thereabout, um, you know, uh, items of clothing.
And our royalty, I think is about 6%.
So there were two reasons behind it.
One, they, they could retail them at $17, oh, sorry.
Wholesale them at $17. We couldn't, ours was 60.
Um, so first one was financial sustainability.
Uh, but the main thing for us is just, um, getting,
you know, that ticky out there and being seen
because people love the logo.
They love that brand. Um,
and the Warehouse can do what we can't. So.
Okay. Thank you. Can I ask another question too?
Can keep going. Do we find someone else? But, okay. Okay.
Thank you. Um, I wanna ask about, um, last year,
if you recall, professor, we discussed, uh,
how sometimes there's discrepancies in the EO when it comes
to our elderly, our queer, that there's certain new words
that have to adapt.
Like, for example, I think an example was umbrella.
There was no such thing as umbrella back in the day
before we arrived.
Um, and so some of our ua, there's a bit
of a struggle point there.
Do you recall, professor, we, we touched on that
and I see with the, um, with the state of today
or, um, Maori report that, um, the,
the speaker growth is being led by our young people.
Mm-hmm. Um, our women
and, um, Maori rural regions, interestingly enough.
Um, so I guess in terms of
that subject matter we discussed last year,
has there been any fado about how to, like,
is there anything in the plans to be done with respect to
how do we bridge that gap between the elderly
and them not really understanding some of this kind of,
Um, neo Maori?
Um, it's always a challenge, right?
Because I think the language,
all languages evolve over time.
And so keeping up
with new language is always gonna be a
challenge for everyone.
It's kind of, so while we continue to develop new words, uh,
and socialize them, uh, it is one of the, um, uh,
what I find more recently is social media has helped
to advance that a lot more.
Um, but I think that complaint of can, will always be fair.
Um, and sometimes it's just not even understanding, um,
you know, the English word at, at the same time.
'cause some of the more nuanced words that are being used.
And then you have another side of that
where you have like the likes of Scotty Morrison
who will use traditional words
and they don't understand those either.
Mm-hmm. So there's always kind of a, um, that's
where is really important, you know, the more we use,
the more we, we start to adapt.
And we, and we, even in English,
we pick up new words, uh, that are created.
Um, but we see it in its context,
and then we under, we kind of understand we don't,
probably not the first hearing.
We kind of think, I think I understand what that word means.
It's kind of a nice word.
Maybe I'll look it up later, never look it up.
And then you hear it again. Think, oh, yeah, okay,
I think I really do get it this time.
So it is a bit of a challenge.
But I think, you know, from, I went to tu um,
the ma language festival
and I actually watched the, one of the best presenters
that I saw there was the Y Maima Knitting Club,
and they were a group of who came together and they knit,
and they don't have the language,
but they're learning with each other.
And I think, you know, they were, she was fantastic.
She, like the queer talked about, you know, who she used
to blame everybody else about not having il.
Mm-hmm. And it was one
of the most powerful presentations I've heard,
and I've heard a lot of presentations about IL.
And, you know, she just, she went all the way back to,
shall I blame Captain Cook?
And then she does this wonderful 30 minute narrative
around all the different people, right.
To her parents. And then this whole sense of loss
of language and just hearing young people today using the
language and wanting, you know, this desire.
And so this knitting club, they have come together to try
and help each other just a little ua.
Um, you know, I think the youngest member is
probably about 85.
Um, and so I think, you know, there are some communities
who are coming together and creating those opportunities.
I think Teta, why, um,
who I know you're gonna see next their role is around
how do they nurture that, those opportunities as well.
So they're probably best placed to see how to support Omata.
But I do want to acknowledge the Wildlife Fund Club.
That was fantastic.
Thank you, Jen.
I'm probably gonna make it a bit more boring now.
That's okay. The Missing Club. Um, very cool story though.
And yeah, sort of puts that hole into action
across the generations,
but I wanna go back to the fact
that reading your annual report, you, your
budget has not changed for,
or your revenue has not changed for since 2019.
Um, and you've implemented some cost saving measures.
Uh, and part of that is a user pays,
and part of that is putting things online.
I guess the question for me is, how do you make certain
that these things are equitable in that,
and that you've still got the same reach?
Or are you monitoring that to ensure
that you've still getting out there to where you need
to get out there and it's not just the few
that can access it?
Oh, absolutely. And it's always a challenge.
Uh, and we, um, we understand the challenge, uh,
and have to find our ways to cut our cloth.
Um, and I think, you know, I'm really heartened by the team,
um, and the opportunities to look for different ways
to try and get that reach.
And so, um, our social media reach, um,
in the past year had grown.
Um, and, you know, that is a space that a lot
of our people are spending a lot of time in, um,
and taking different approaches where it's not just here's,
um, uh, a notice.
I, I'm kind of, I always get excited by what is the new meme
that they've put up from, you know, some, uh,
I think the last one I read was the, um, one from Wicked,
you know, all translated.
And, and I just think that's cool
because, you know, that's reaching, you know, our kids
to be able to think, oh yes, wicked could be in te.
Um, and so I think, you know, it's kinda trying to, um,
be more innovative with, um, the opportunities that we have
to be able to spread il, um, and try
and be a little bit more relevant to,
to our audiences as well.
Um, so it's not just very, here's some research,
we did this research and here are the results
and lots of New Zealanders, it's still loving IL
and yeah, for us,
and it's kind of how do we kind
of connect on a different kind of level.
So I just want to acknowledge the comms team for the lots
of money that they've done in that space.
Um, but, you know, it is a challenge,
but, um, I'm always heartened by the fact that
we might pivot a little bit to try a different unity,
but, uh, our, the response
and engagement that we have with other people, uh,
with partnerships as well, continuing
to grow those partnerships to help leverage, uh,
with other people, uh, is, uh, has helped us through that.
Um, yeah, ask,
Um, and that's great.
I, I love hearing that, I guess off the back of
what Rena was saying, um, that
there's the older generation as well who,
and I know not a lot of them, some, some of them do get
to social media, but there's a big contingent
that doesn't don't as well.
So we're ensuring that, how we're ensuring
that those people are seeing your messages,
that the connections are there as well
through the knitting club might be one way, but
Well, for sure, I'm not sure that's all.
But because of us though, um, I think, you know,
within the whole of our role is to be able to try
and coordinate so that everyone is playing their role
and, you know, the different, um, agencies
and entities that are responsible for different parts of
that they are to lead out on that.
And particularly with community more specifically is, um,
ours, our remit is largely
around supporting government agencies to be able
to be more responsive in Europe.
And how do they look like they're engaging? Yeah.
Probably didn't put that right. Sorry.
I mean, do, do you monitor that they are getting
to the different generations as well?
So are those groups getting to the, you know Yeah.
Ensuring that, that they're keeping modern,
but also getting to the different generations?
No. Yeah. We, we do, um, an annual survey, um, which is,
we commission varying to do that survey, uh,
and we trust the results they give back to us
because researchers, their, their prime, you know, um,
activity, uh,
and we look
through the different age groups to see how we're going.
Um, I know that one of, um, one
of my DCE has brought along the latest Ian survey to share
with you guys if you want it after we finished.
Um, but yeah, we, we, we tend to, um, to measure in terms
of, you know, the,
the new email subscribers and things like that.
Well, we used to email subscribers and followers,
but now we combine that
because they're pretty much the same thing.
If you don't want to be bugged with spam email,
you go and be a follower.
And that's where everybody tends to go these days, right?
But the important thing is looking at that, um, at that, at
that particular survey to see how groups ethnicities,
et cetera, responding to re
and it is specifically targeted
around attitudes towards Del Maori,
not towards Maori language programming or whatever else.
It's Rio Maori. And, you know, our country is amazing.
74% of the respondents to
that particular survey come back saying they have a positive
attitude towards Rio and is an important, um,
part of our national identity.
So, um, yeah, we do monitor it,
although not specifically for age groups,
but we get that, that particular Yep.
Um, thank you. And I think we would love
to see the results of the latest Yeah, yeah. Agree.
Yeah. Um, it's either a sucked there
or potentially a primary.
Um, just when I look at the, uh,
the Maori language report a couple months ago, which was
so insightful, um, so public support
for Maori is growing, which is awesome.
Um, increasing number of students are learning it.
Um, and Maori speakers have reached their highest ever,
but, um, use in the home is declining.
Uh, obviously that's gonna be, you know, fair chunk
of our next conversation.
Um, but what to, what, um, how is that, that finding,
um, from you guys informing, uh, your,
your developing work plan?
I think, um, all of that kind of information helps
to steer us on what we prioritize over the different kinds
of COPA that we we deliver in the year.
Mm-hmm. So, and you know, as, uh,
budget's always really tight, so we have
to make some calls on, on certain things.
So, uh, it very much helps us to think about, uh,
what are the things we want to prioritize.
Um, in that report we were, I was quite pleased to use it
as my state of the nation, so new initiative to try
and kind of, you know, outline, you know, here is, um,
the latest results of research, um, to hopefully kind
of raise critical awareness.
So I think sometimes when people understand, um,
what's happening, then it's always a, you know, it's kind
of, it's very helpful to kind
of keep the messages being pushed out.
So for you, some specific,
Well, just what, what, yeah, yeah.
What I'm, because this is our, um,
my second I've just clicked over two years
and then pieces is my second
time going through this process.
And now I think I've got my head around where
all the different, um, language entities that we have.
Um, and so if you include for ka Maori and,
and then 2K selves and five who are all focused on,
and I mean, I, it's, it's really positive that
what we're seeing is a, is a, is an increasing, um,
enthusiasm for the place of Taal Maori as part of new,
both the New Zealand as part of our identity.
Um, but equally it's, it's concerning to me that
that's not translating into people using it
more in every day.
And so what I've been looking for, um, across today, um,
as we've been speaking with the various commissions
with TPK yesterday is, um,
is shifts in terms of strategy towards, um,
what I don't want to get in terms of the focus,
focus on the second one,
because obviously the first one's going really well.
Yeah. I, I'll, I'll just respond to that one
because, um, it, it's been a, a problem
that we've been fighting with for a bit, right?
I remember last year telling me
the story about your own son. Yeah,
Yeah. And it's, that's similar
thing that, you know, could kids,
um, Henry did a, a a a brilliant with, um, doctoral thesis,
which made the dean's list about why could the kids only
speak Maori at school and at the ma.
Yes. And it's because those are the two places
that they believe that Del Maori is being valued at.
Mm-hmm. And so for a lot of, um, you know, for a lot
of young people, um,
they don't see Del Maori in general society
and they hear a lot of English.
Um, and so that's where they go to,
and that's, that's a natural thing.
You speak the language that everybody else speaks
or you aspire to do that.
Um, so even those children who have gone to Kura
and who have been in total immersion all
of their schooling lives, that's what's happening.
They're being influenced once they move out.
I've got, um, staff at work who I have to continually remind
who affluent Maori,
you are lucky you've speak Maori to me, right.
And we're supposed to be the Maori Language Commission.
Yeah. Um, and,
and so we've had to, even, even in my, that that's there,
and I think that's what this, uh, what this report,
this finding points out is
that while we are doing a great job converting the nation,
um, we're still not converting them enough Yeah.
To actually use the language all the
time or as much as they can.
And just on that, of the five principles
of language revitalization use is always the hardest.
And it's the hardest to kind of encourage,
because largely what you have is you have, um,
language bonding so you can bond with a person,
whatever your first language is with
that person is often the language you continue to use,
even if you know they can speak another language.
Mm-hmm. So subconsciously, so even if your whanau, uh,
you know, so I'll give you an example.
One of my best friends, her
and I went to university together and, uh, we met each other
and we spoke English to each other.
And as much as, you know, I have
to consciously switch off my English brain to speak to her.
And so, you know, it's, the language bonding is a, is a,
is a really strong thing.
And it happens in families. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
So, um, and that's where it's really hard
to make the conversion
because the switch out is, uh, you're having to retrain
or undo the bond rebo with another language.
And so it is like, it's a real thing.
It's not a can't solve that I can't go into your home
and say, stop speaking English and it will happen.
Um, so there are, there are a number
of contributing factors,
but definitely use has always been the hardest one.
It's the, it's the biggest challenge of all the five, um,
principles of language revitalation.
And so I've always encouraged by families, um,
and iwi who have like really
bonded their children into only speaking
and you know, it's become their normalized language.
Mm-hmm. Um, and you know, that takes a lot of effort.
I totally get, you know, I understand.
Um, but even when people walk in, they still speak
to the old because that language bond is so strong.
And I think that's stuff that we need,
need to continue to work on. That's
Fascinating. Uh, Steve,
yeah, I mean, I'm, it is fascinating
and I, my heart sort of sunk when I read that same point
as Greg pointed out, that it's, um, it's a concern,
particularly we are considering important role
of consideration transmission
that it's declining use in home.
But I wonder there must be, you must know about, um,
the patterns of adoption
of indigenous language in other parts of the world mm-hmm.
Where revitalization has, uh, succeeded or is succeeding.
Will it be that those, um,
kopa kids, when they have their own children, we'll speak
to the Maori to them in the home, is that that's what's
Happening. That's definitely the aspiration
and definitely what we seen.
There's signs of that so that Yeah.
Um, in a sense that language bonding that they, they,
those kids have with their own parents
may have been in English, but now they will,
they will language bond with their children.
And often it is when you have children
that you are motivated even more to use il.
And so, you know, trying to make that language bond than
and there is, is important.
Yeah. So, so how, how much should we be
that concerned about it if there's, if that's part
of it's gonna, the process that
and a generation will see it flipped the other way.
Um, I'm looking forward to it. Yeah.
That's what I'm looking forward to if I'm being honest.
That's my, I mean, that's always been my aspiration.
You know, I talk about language revitalization.
People talk about it as a marathon,
I talk about it as a relay.
Um, you know, they, one generation has to carry the baton.
Often that first carrier
of the baton is not a language speaker.
'cause they're the ones who are the making the change.
Right. And so they spend all their effort
and energy to raise children in.
And then the idea is they pass that banner on.
We need our kids to like take it to our grandchildren
and, you know, fulfill that aspiration.
Um, and so I'm hopeful,
but to speak to the international examples, you know,
people measure success in different ways.
Uh, a lot of the, the things we see like in, um,
Wales and Ireland, mm.
You know, they've become very institutionalized
as well in terms
of the way they measure their language revitalization in
terms of, uh, you know, in schools compulsory.
But that doesn't always translate back into usage.
Um, I, my, um, Irish hairdresser,
I know this is a very random tangent point,
but her, she was telling me that they all had
to learn Irish at school
and her husband, uh, still can speak the language
because his family spoke it.
Yeah. But she never did.
She just thought, oh, that's for school.
And she never, she just was like,
I don't see the relevance of it.
And so you, you are always gonna get confronted
by different ways of approaching it.
And I think when well was talking about with URA kids
who only saw the school and the Mara as those places mm-hmm.
You are institutionalizing it that we need to break it down
so that society is also contributing.
My language is important. I can speak it everywhere.
I should speak it everywhere.
Um, because it's the norm rather than the exception.
And we are getting better at it as a country, you know,
our own English is very moldy.
Yeah. So simply, and, and then come over to your Yeah.
'cause I, I wonder, um, my own son was going to school.
I was keen that he could do go in the, um, immersion,
total immersion, but he's,
and they were, I think the strategy was correct to focus on
households where they knew al Maori was being spoken at
home by at least one parent.
So it's sort of the logic is strengthening
where the embers are already hot rather than trying
to get a fire going somewhere else.
But I, I wonder in terms of the broader objective, whether
there is a need for us to get, um, a much broader
exposure to, to Maori in the education system.
'cause um, obviously immersion is working,
but the, in the mainstream schooling, it's,
there's still a real lack of exposure to it
or a lack of opportunity.
A hundred percent. And I think that's, you know,
we still need to continue to build our capacity
and capability in, in the education system to help support
that and ensure that more of our tamari, uh,
across the whole country have access to good quality health.
Got, okay. We'll move to dam. Yeah.
Mine's, just to sit on the same topic, um, um, I come from
and um, we speak our own kind of, uh, half half Maori,
that's where he from half English kind
of thing that goes on.
And it's a real mix of, you know,
they get people come from overseas, they can't understand
what we're talking about because I don't have far,
that's the big, it's kind of like just words and dispute,
but you learn so much that way as well.
Um, but one of my question really was about, um,
regionalization of, well, of the work that you're doing
because, you know, in 56%, uh, Maori population, um,
huge use of, you know, I see it every single day use
of today children and young parents
and, um, really, you know, engaged into that.
But I, I see that because that's the place that I live in.
And, um, and I wonder how you've,
how you regionalize the data that you get
because, you know, some of it will be very heavily weighted
one direction and, and some in the other.
And how do you spread your, your resource
and your words across
Different aspects of that throughout the country?
I think, um, so to the regional aspects, then that's
what has, um, one of the things I am proud about in, um, tu
Maori is the,
and to remit is that ability to
support regional development
and aspirations for exactly the things that you talked about
where you have high speaker populations in some regions
versus those who are still very much
at the beginning of the journey.
You have a, an ability to focus on that.
So in the past to used to fund all the, uh,
initiatives and
that didn't necessarily always take into account
regional need.
Mm-hmm. And so now have their,
that are able to decide what is our priorities
for our region, and then fund accordingly.
So the question is probably better asked to them,
but I think it's a, um, I like to think as one
of the designers of it Yeah.
That it kind of gets to that, you know, the actual need of
what that region needs.
Yeah. And, um, because they are, you know, where I come from
and the Eastern Bay of Plenty,
we have large speaker numbers.
Yes. Um, but that doesn't mean that we need
to be working on our language as well.
No. That's which might have a different kind
of priority in that space.
But also what I'm also proud
of is seeing people wanna focus on their dialect.
Mm. And which kind of has a, gives you a confidence
that the language is strong enough at a base level
to now focus on dialect.
And that in, in
and of itself is a signal of the health of the language.
And yeah. So I'm really proud about that. That's
Awesome. Yeah. Thank you.
Room for one last question.
If there's a burning one, um, okay, then you don't mind, um,
again, at the, um, when, when there was the launch of
that sale of the Nation report a couple of months ago, um,
I I distinctly remember one of the findings was that part
of what's stopping people from, um,
conversing in the real is that they're worried
that they'd make mistakes.
Yes. Do you recall that? Yes. Yeah.
And I think about how we're going to, um, how we're going
to, uh, combat that.
Because there's times where, you know, I come across, um,
that are so forgiving and there's so lovely,
but there's times, and we've seen it in the house
where some people, um, are quite reprimanded when, uh, um,
pronunciation is not done correctly.
And, and then it makes you, it makes you feel,
you know, in a sad way.
So how do we combat that from your perspective?
Or is that also something we maybe I can put
towards tomato? What?
Alright, so, um, I, myself
and my colleague, uh, we eat a lot of research on
how do we shift attitude.
Mm-hmm. Um, and getting that appreciation of what I like
to call the big, that stop people from talking.
And one of them is, you know, uh, or being embarrassed.
Uh, the other is, um, the fear.
Fear is a big one. Or being told off, being told off.
Um, and so my right shifting model is around how do you
positively move people along the spectrum?
Um, I think, you know, in heightened political situations,
often people use it as a weapon
and that does trigger people's trauma around the language.
I'm not an advocate for it.
I am very much in the, everyone needs to give it a go
because it's, when you practice
and use the language, um, you know,
it gets easier and easier.
And adult learners always find that struggle.
They find it harder than kids.
That's why we always go, oh, the kids pick it up so quickly,
it's because they don't have the same inhibitions.
We have the inhibitions of that power, um,
of feeling like we've lost our power
'cause we're not sure we're uncertain.
We could give it a go. We might get it wrong.
And, you know, it is unfortunate.
I don't like people who reprimand people for il. Mm-hmm.
I used to be one of those people as a early academic
and language teacher, but now I'm on the, you know,
just give it a go, go.
Gotta give it a go because you never know like how
to, how will people learn?
And that kind of speaks to the trajectory
of why the use principle is really hard to engage with
because it, um, people's just come out of their,
out, out of, out of themselves depending on who it is.
'cause they, um, often make assumptions.
They think the person is far too fluent.
Um, sometimes they're not.
And um, I used to always have anxiety,
which I'm sure the rest of the nation has, uh, talking to.
Uh, and um,
but then I realized, you know,
I just had to get open myself.
'cause you know, I just had to talk to him.
And, uh, you know, whilst in
inside I might have been shaking, I'm still,
I'm like giving it a go.
And, and I found that actually he doesn't ground me. Okay.
That, oh. Like, thank goodness he's also from my,
I might say, but in the knitting circle,
not quiet. No.
Can I just add to that too?
Um, little ticky symbolizes our approach as well,
and there are three, the first one would be
finding out the commonalities that join us all together.
And one of the ones that we came across is, you know,
new Zealanders always like to do the right thing
and revitalization of our deal, our,
our New Zealand's only language is the right thing to do.
The second thing is data.
So everything we do is data informed and research informed.
Um, and one of the things that we do know from
that research is that fear of making a mistake, shame
or that kind of stuff, that's the biggest
impediment to people learning.
And so one of the things that we've done is
that we've really promoted kindness to learners.
Right. And I've come across it in my own life where I've,
you know, with the best of intentions, tried
to crack somebody and ended up offending them.
Um, so looking for better ways
to help people rather than growling them, judging them,
telling them off there, there was a time
whenever somebody mispronounced the language on air,
we'd be putting out a press release demon, that person.
Right. We don't do that anymore
because you just don't win friends.
Once you punch somebody in the face,
they don't wanna come back to your house.
Right. So it's really, really important for me.
And not that I do that I'm too little anyway.
Um, but you know, for us in our, you know, our comms team,
um, and for everybody that works in our,
it's about being kind.
Because by being kind, you get more people to come back
to your, and to stay and carry on to that journey.
And I think that's a great place to finish up here today.
And, and thank you very much for you
and your team for attending today.
It's been, uh, it's, it's been insightful.
It's been, it's been great to have this conversation, Ian,
the important role that you guys.
Well and with Maori and we've had a big day of it.
We had a big afternoon, we've got a to go
and all based on all that just stuff.
So it's, it's really good for us.
So thank you for coming today
and I wish you all well luck cda.
Thank you.